.\"
.\" This file is a part of DNSViz, a tool suite for DNS/DNSSEC monitoring,
.\" analysis, and visualization.
.\" Created by Casey Deccio (casey@deccio.net)
.\"
.\" Copyright 2015 VeriSign, Inc.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.TH dnsgrok 1 "26 Aug 2015" "v0.4.0"
.SH NAME
dnsgrok \- process diagnostic DNS queries to serialized output
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnsgrok [options]
.I [domain_name...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dnsgrok
processes the results of diagnostic queries previously performed, e.g., using
\fIdnsget(1)\fP, to assess the health of the associated DNS deployments for one
or more domain names specified.  The results of this processing are serialized
into JSON format for further programmatic diagnostics or alerts.

Domain names to be processed may be passed either as command-line arguments, in
a file (using the \fI-f\fP option), or simply implied using the diagnostic
query input.  The latter is the preferred methodology (and the simplest) and is
useful, except in cases where the input contains diagnostic queries for
multiple domain names, only a subset of which are to be processed.

If \fI-f\fP is not used and no domain names are supplied on the command line,
then the domain names to be processed are extracted from the diagnostic query
input.  If the \fI-f\fP option is used, then names may not be specified on the
command line.

The domain names passed as input are fully-qualified domain names, such as
example.com, www.example.com, _443._tcp.example.com, 1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa, or
8.b.d.0.1.0.0.2.ip6.arpa.  Because it is implied that specified domain names
are fully qualified, no trailing dot is necessary.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-f <filename>"
Read names from a file (one name per line), instead of from command line.

If this option is used, then names may not be specified on the command line.
.IP "-r <filename>"
Read diagnostic query input from the specified file, instead of from standard
input.
.IP "-t <filename>"
Specify a file that contains trusted keys for processing diagnostic queries.

The format of this file is master zone file format and should contain DNSKEY
records that correspond to one more trusted keys for one or more DNS zones.
.IP "-o <filename>"
Write the output to the specified file instead of to standard output, which
is the default.
.IP -p
Make JSON output "pretty" instead of minimal (i.e., using indentation and
newlines).
.IP "-l <level>"
Display only information at the specified log priority or higher.  Valid values
(in increasing order of priority) are: "error", "warning", "info", and "debug".
The default is "debug".
.IP -h
Display the usage and exit.

.SH EXIT CODES
The exit codes are:
.IP 0
Program terminated normally.
.IP 1
Incorrect usage.
.IP 2
Required package dependencies were not found.
.IP 3
There was an error processing the input or saving the output.
.IP 4
Program execution was interrupted, or an unknown error ocurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dnsget (1), dnsviz (1), dv (1)
