.\"
.\" This file is a part of DNSViz, a tool suite for DNS/DNSSEC monitoring,
.\" analysis, and visualization.
.\" Created by Casey Deccio (casey@deccio.net)
.\"
.\" Copyright 2015-2016 VeriSign, Inc.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2016-2024 Casey Deccio
.\"
.\" DNSViz is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with DNSViz.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH dnsviz-grok 1 "26 September 2024" "0.11.0"
.SH NAME
dnsviz-grok \- assess diagnostic DNS queries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnsviz
\fBgrok\fR
[ \fIoptions\fR ]
[ \fIdomain_name...\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Process the results of diagnostic DNS queries previously performed, e.g., using
\fBdnsviz-probe(1)\fR, to assess the health of the associated DNS deployments for one
or more domain names specified.  The results of this processing are serialized
into JSON format for further programmatic diagnostics or alerts.

The source of the diagnostic query input is either a file specified with
\fB-r\fR or standard input.

Domain names to be processed may be passed either as command-line arguments, in
a file (using the \fB-f\fR option), or simply implied using the diagnostic
query input.  The latter is the preferred methodology (and the simplest) and is
useful, except in cases where the input contains diagnostic queries for
multiple domain names, only a subset of which are to be processed.

If \fB-f\fR is not used and no domain names are supplied on the command line,
then the domain names to be processed are extracted from the diagnostic query
input.  If the \fB-f\fR option is used, then names may not be specified on the
command line.

The domain names passed as input are fully-qualified domain names, such as
example.com, www.example.com, _443._tcp.example.com, 1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa, or
8.b.d.0.1.0.0.2.ip6.arpa.  Because it is implied that specified domain names
are fully qualified, no trailing dot is necessary.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -f, --names-file \fIfilename\fR
Read names from a file (one name per line), instead of from command line.

If this option is used, then names may not be specified on the command line.
.TP
.B -r, --input-file \fIfilename\fR
Read diagnostic query input from the specified file, instead of from standard
input.
.TP
.B -t, --trusted-keys-file \fIfilename\fR
Use trusted keys from the specified file when processing diagnostic queries.
This overrides the default behavior of using the installed keys for the root
zone.

The format of this file is master zone file format and should contain DNSKEY
records that correspond to one more trusted keys for one or more DNS zones.

This option may be used multiple times on the command line.
.TP
.B -a, --algorithms \fIalg\fR[,\fIalg...\fI]
Support only the DNSSEC algorithms specified.  If this option is used, any
algorithms not specified will appear as "unsupported."  The status of any RRSIG
records corresponding to unsupported algorithms will be unknown.  Additionally,
when a zone has only DS records with unsupported algorithms, the zone is
treated as "insecure", assuming the DS records are properly authenticated.
.TP
.B -d, --digest-algorithms \fIdigest_alg\fR[,\fIdigest_alg...\fI]
Support only the DNSSEC digest algorithms specified.  If this option is used,
any digest algorithms not specified will appear as "unsupported."  The status
of any DS records corresponding to unsupported digest algorithms will be
unknown.  Additionally, when a zone has only DS records with unsupported digest
algorithms, the zone is treated as "insecure", assuming the DS records are
properly authenticated.
.TP
.B --ignore-rfc8624
Ignore errors associated with RFC 8624, DNSSEC algorithm implementation
requirements.  RFC 8624 designates some DNSSEC signing algorithms and some DS
digest algorithms as prohibited ("MUST NOT") or not recommended for validation
and/or signing.  If this option is used, then no warnings will be issued, and
the code will still assess their cryptographic status, rather than ignoring
them.
.TP
.B --ignore-rfc9276
Ignore errors associated with RFC 9276, NSEC3 parameter settings.  RFC 9276
specifies that if NSEC3 is used, the iterations count must be 0 and the salt
length must be 0.  If this option is used, then no warnings will be issued for
NSEC3 records that violate this specification.
.TP
.B -C, --enforce-cookies
Enforce DNS cookies strictly. Require a server to return a "BADCOOKIE" response
when a query contains a COOKIE option with no server cookie or with an invalid
server cookie.
.TP
.B -P, --allow-private
Allow private IP addresses for authoritative DNS servers.  By default, if the
IP address corresponding to an authoritative server is in IP address space
designated as "private", it is flagged as an error.  However, there are some
cases where this is allowed.  For example, if the diagnostic queries are issued
to servers in an experimental environment, this might be permissible.
.TP
.B --trust-cdnskey-cds
Trust all CDNSKEY and CDS records, even if they are not "signed with a key that
is represented in both the current DNSKEY and DS RRsets" (RFC 7344).  This is
allowed if "the Parent uses the CDS or CDNSKEY RRset for initial enrollment; in
that case, the Parent validates the CDS/CDNSKEY through some other means" (RFC
7344).  Because there is no way for DNSViz to discover the out-of-band means
with which the parent might have validated the CDNSKEY and/or CDS records, this
trust is signaled with the use of the \fB--trust-cdnskey-cds\fR command-line
option.
.TP
.B --multi-signer
Don't issue errors for missing KSKs with DS RRs.  Typically an error is issued
if a given DNSKEY is not found in the DNSKEY RRset returned by one or more
servers.  If \fB--multi-signer\fR is specified, then no error is issued,
in the case that 1) the DNSKEY is not signing any non-DNSKEY RRsets (i.e., is a
zone-signing key or ZSK) and 2) the DNSKEY corresponds to a DS record in the
parent.  This corresponds to the Model 2 use case in RFC 8901.
.TP
.B -o, --output-file \fIfilename\fR
Write the output to the specified file instead of to standard output, which
is the default.
.TP
.B -c, --minimize-output
Format JSON output minimally instead of "pretty" (i.e., with indentation and
newlines).
.TP
.B -l, --log-level \fIlevel\fR
Display only information at the specified log priority or higher.  Valid values
(in increasing order of priority) are: "error", "warning", "info", and "debug".
The default is "debug".
.TP
.B -h, --help
Display the usage and exit.

.SH EXIT CODES
The exit codes are:
.IP 0
Program terminated normally.
.IP 1
Incorrect usage.
.IP 2
Required package dependencies were not found.
.IP 3
There was an error processing the input or saving the output.
.IP 4
Program execution was interrupted, or an unknown error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dnsviz(1),
.BR dnsviz-probe(1),
.BR dnsviz-graph(1),
.BR dnsviz-print(1),
.BR dnsviz-query(1)
