.\"
.\" This file is a part of DNSViz, a tool suite for DNS/DNSSEC monitoring,
.\" analysis, and visualization.
.\" Created by Casey Deccio (casey@deccio.net)
.\"
.\" Copyright 2015-2016 VeriSign, Inc.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with DNSViz.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH dnsviz-print 1 "18 Nov 2016" "0.6.5"
.SH NAME
dnsviz-print \- print the assessment of diagnostic DNS queries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnsviz
\fBprint\fR
[ \fIoptions\fR ]
[ \fIdomain_name...\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Process the results of diagnostic DNS queries previously performed, e.g., using
\fBdnsviz-probe(1)\fR, to assess the health of the associated DNS deployments
for one or more domain names specified.  The results of this processing are
presented in textual output.

The source of the diagnostic query input is either a file specified with
\fB-r\fR or standard input.

Domain names to be processed may be passed either as command-line arguments, in
a file (using the \fB-f\fR option), or simply implied using the diagnostic
query input.  The latter is the preferred methodology (and the simplest) and is
useful, except in cases where the input contains diagnostic queries for
multiple domain names, only a subset of which are to be processed.

If \fB-f\fR is not used and no domain names are supplied on the command line,
then the domain names to be processed are extracted from the diagnostic query
input.  If the \fB-f\fR option is used, then names may not be specified on the
command line.

The domain names passed as input are fully-qualified domain names, such as
example.com, www.example.com, _443._tcp.example.com, 1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa, or
8.b.d.0.1.0.0.2.ip6.arpa.  Because it is implied that specified domain names
are fully qualified, no trailing dot is necessary.

The output is appropriate for terminal or text file output, using colors
(where supported by the terminal) and symbols to designate status and errors in
a loosely-defined textual format.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -f \fIfilename\fR
Read names from a file (one name per line), instead of from command line.

If this option is used, then names may not be specified on the command line.
.TP
.B -r \fIfilename\fR
Read diagnostic query input from the specified file, instead of from standard
input.
.TP
.B -t \fIfilename\fR
Specify a file that contains trusted keys for processing diagnostic queries.
This overrides the default behavior of using the built-in keys for the root
zone.

The format of this file is master zone file format and should contain DNSKEY
records that correspond to one more trusted keys for one or more DNS zones.

This option may be used multiple times on the command line.
.TP
.B -R \fItype\fR[,\fItype...\fR]
Process queries of only the specified type(s) (e.g., A, AAAA).  The default is
to process all types queried as part of the diagnostic input.
.TP
.B -O
Save the output to a file, whose name is derived from the domain name.

If this option is used when the diagnostic queries of multiple domain names are
being processed, a file will be created for each domain name processed.
.TP
.B -o \fIfilename\fR
Write the output to the specified file instead of to standard output, which
is the default.

If this option is used when the diagnostic queries of multiple domain name are
being processed, a single file (the one specified) will be created, which will
contain the collective output for all domain names processed.

.TP
.B -h
Display the usage and exit.

.SH OUTPUT

The following is an example of the output:

.PD 0
\fB.\fP [.]
.P
[.]  DNSKEY: 8/1518/256 [.], 8/19036/257 [.]
.P
[.]    RRSIG: ./8/19036 (2015-08-20 - 2015-09-03) [.]
.P
\fBcom\fP [.] [.]
.P
[.]  DS: 8/30909/2 [.]
.P
[.]    RRSIG: ./8/1518 (2015-08-26 - 2015-09-05) [.]
.P
[.]  DNSKEY: 8/30909/257 [.], 8/35864/256 [.]
.P
[.]    RRSIG: com/8/30909 (2015-08-24 - 2015-08-31) [.]
.P
\fBexample.com\fP [.] [.]
.P
[.]  DS: 8/31406/1 [.], 8/31406/2 [.], 8/31589/1 [-], 8/31589/2 [-], 8/43547/1 [-], 8/43547/2 [-]
.P
[.]    RRSIG: com/8/35864 (2015-08-24 - 2015-08-31) [.]
.P
[.]  DNSKEY: 8/54108/256 [.], 8/31406/257 [.], 8/63870/256 [.]
.P
[.]    RRSIG: example.com/8/31406 (2015-08-24 - 2015-09-14) [.]
.P
\fBwww.example.com\fP
.P
[.]  A: 192.0.2.1
.P
[.]    RRSIG: example.com/8/31406 (2015-08-24 - 2015-09-14) [.]
.P
\fBnon-existent.example.com\fP
.P
[.]  A: NXDOMAIN
.P
[.]    SOA: sns.dns.icann.org. noc.dns.icann.org. 2015082401 7200 3600 1209600 3600
.P
[.]      RRSIG: example.com/8/54108 (2015-08-24 - 2015-09-14) [.]
.P
[.]    PROOF:  [.]
.P
[.]      NSEC: example.com. www.example.com. A NS SOA TXT AAAA RRSIG NSEC DNSKEY
.P
[.]        RRSIG: example.com/8/54108 (2015-08-21 - 2015-09-11) [.]
.PD

.SS Domain Names

The output above is divided into several sections, each corresponding to the
domain name that starts the section (e.g., example.com).  Following the headers
of names that correspond to zones are two sets of characters, each within
brackets.  The characters within the first set of brackets represent the status
of the zone.  The characters within the second set of brackets represent the
status of the delegation (note that this second set of bracketed characters
will not be present for the root zone).

The first character within each set of brackets is one of the following:

.IP .
secure zone or delegation
.IP -
insecure zone or delegation
.IP !
bogus zone or delegation
.IP ?
lame or incomplete delegation

.P
If there is a second character within the brackets, it represents the following:

.IP !
errors are present
.IP ?
warnings are present

.P
For example, an insecure delegation with warnings is represented as: [-?]  And
a secure delegation with no errors is shown as: [.]

.SS Query Responses

The lines in each section, below the header, represent responses to queries for
that name from one or more servers.  The bracketed characters at the far left
of each line represent the status of the response or response component on the
rest of the line.  The first character in the brackets represents the
authentication status:

.IP .
secure
.IP -
insecure
.IP !
bogus

.P
If there is a second character within the brackets, it represents the
following:

.IP !
errors are present
.IP ?
warnings are present

.P
For example, an insecure status with warnings is represented as: [-?]  And a
secure status with no errors is shown as: [.]

The status of the response is followed by the type corresponding to the query
or response.  For example, "A" means that data following is in response to a
query of type A (IPv4 address) for the name of the corresponding section.  When
the response is positive (i.e., there is data in the answer section), the
corresponding data is shown on the right (with some exceptions) as a
comma-separated set of records within the RRset.  DNSKEY, DS, and RRSIG records
show an abbreviated format of their records, as follows:

.IP DNSKEY:
<algorithm number>/<key tag>/<flags>

Example: 8/35864/256
.IP DS:
<algorithm number>/<key tag>/<digest type>

Example: 8/30909/2
.IP RRSIG:
<signer>/<algorithm number>/<key tag> (<inception> - <expiration>)

Example: com/8/35864 (2015-08-24 - 2015-08-31)

.P
Following each record within a DNSKEY, DS, or RRSIG response is a bracketed set
of characters, the first of which represents validity:

.IP .
valid

.IP -
indeterminate

.IP !
invalid/expired/premature

.IP ?
indeterminate due to unknown algorithm

.P
If there is a second character within the brackets, it represents the
following:

.IP !
errors are present
.IP ?
warnings are present

.P
For example, a DNSKEY with warnings is shown as: [.?]  A DS corresponding to a
non-existent DNSKEY is represented as: [-].

RRSIGs are shown below the RRset they cover, indented from the RRset.

.SS Negative Responses
If a response is negative, then the appropriate "NODATA" or "NXDOMAIN" text is
shown adjacent the type queried, e.g., "A: NXDOMDAIN".  If there was an SOA
record and/or NSEC(3) proof, then they are listed below, indented from the
query type.

The NSEC or NSEC3 records (and their RRSIGs) comprising a proof
are grouped by indentation under the title "PROOF" which is itself indented
under the negative response line.  Following "PROOF" is a bracketed set of
characters with the same meaning as those used for DS, DNSKEY, and RRSIG.

.SS Errors and Warnings
Textual errors and warnings are listed below the response components with which
the issues are associated.  Each error or warning is listed on its own line and
prefaced with "E:" or "W:", signifying whether it is an error or warning,
respectively.

.SH EXIT CODES
The exit codes are:
.IP 0
Program terminated normally.
.IP 1
Incorrect usage.
.IP 2
Required package dependencies were not found.
.IP 3
There was an error processing the input or saving the output.
.IP 4
Program execution was interrupted, or an unknown error ocurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dnsviz(1),
.BR dnsviz-probe(1),
.BR dnsviz-grok(1),
.BR dnsviz-graph(1),
.BR dnsviz-query(1)
