.\"
.\" This file is a part of DNSViz, a tool suite for DNS/DNSSEC monitoring,
.\" analysis, and visualization.
.\" Created by Casey Deccio (casey@deccio.net)
.\"
.\" Copyright 2015-2016 VeriSign, Inc.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" DNSViz is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with DNSViz.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.TH dnsviz 1 "18 Nov 2016" "0.6.5"
.SH NAME
dnsviz \- issue and assess diagnostic DNS queries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B dnsviz
\fIcommand\fR
[ \fIoptions\fR ]
.TP
.B dnsviz
\fBhelp\fR [ \fIcommand\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
.B dnsviz
is a tool for assessing the health of DNS deployments by issuing diagnostic
queries, assessing the responses, and outputting the results in one of several
formats.  The assessment may be directed towards recursive or authoritative DNS
servers, and the output may be textual, graphical, or serialized for
programmatic review.
.P
.B dnsviz
is invoked by specifying one of its commands as the first argument on the
command line, followed by arguments specific to that command.  If the first
argument is "help", then the usage of the command specified by the second
argument is displayed.  If no second argument is provided, then a general usage
message is given.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B probe
Issue diagnostic DNS queries.  See \fBdnsviz-probe(1)\fR.
.TP
.B grok
Assess diagnostic DNS queries See \fBdnsviz-grok(1)\fR.
.TP
.B graph
Graph the assessment of diagnostic DNS queries See \fBdnsviz-graph(1)\fR.
.TP
.B print
Process diagnostic DNS queries to textual output See \fBdnsviz-print(1)\fR.
.TP
.B query
Assess a DNS query See \fBdnsviz-query(1)\fR.
.TP
.B "\fBhelp\fR [ \fIcommand\fR ]"
Show usage generally, or for a specific command.
.SH EXIT CODES
The exit codes are:
.TP
.B 0
Program terminated normally.
.TP
.B 1
Incorrect usage.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dnsviz-probe(1),
.BR dnsviz-grok(1),
.BR dnsviz-graph(1),
.BR dnsviz-print(1),
.BR dnsviz-query(1)
